docs/book/introduction/motivation.md, before:

# Motivation

!!! abstract "This section is heavily based on the book *Accelerate*."

Compared to other industries, software products have low up front costs and require low distribution efforts. These aspects enable us to create cheap prototypes of products and provide them to users globally with little overhead. 

If these traits are limited our business loses its ability to pivot with market changes and we are at the mercy of our competitors. While it is not always necessary to act, the decision to do so should be driven by business factors, not technological limits.

## Key capabilities by *Accelerate*

The book Accelerate by whatnot etc presents the findings of the largest study done in the field of software products and continuous delivery. The study done in 2017 focused on four key capabilities for software product releases.

### Code deployment

Code deployment measures the frequency of how often we release new versions of our application to the consumer.

### Commit to deploy

Commit to deploy describes the lead time from the last software change to make it into a new release for code deployment.

### Recover from down time

Recover from down time is the process of identifying a show stopping problem in a software application to re-establishing a functioning system. Also includes recovering from external attacks like malevolent system infiltrations or denial of service attacks. 

### Change fail rate

Change fail rate appraises how often the distributed software executable does not match the desired expectations. New code deployments should minimize required unexpected fixes.

## Metrics by *Accelerate*

The study compared these key capabilities of software distribution between high and low performing organizations and found that high performers had:

- **46x** frequent code deployments
- **440x** faster lead time from commit to deploy
- **170x** faster mean time to recover from down time
- **1/5** of fails on changes

Building these paradigms into the core of software development enabled high performers to double the probability of reaching their business goals compared to low performers across industries and departments. Improving our software delivery effectiveness will improve our ability to incorporate customer feedback more effectively.

Commit message:

🌍 Add meta data and social cards (#12)
* Ignore cache of mkdocs

* Generate social cards on release

* Add metadata to first section

* Add metadata to introduction section

* Update description and add social cards

* Rename chapters in navigation

docs/book/introduction/motivation.md, after:

---
title: Motivation
description: The book Accelerate by whatnot etc presents the findings of the largest study done in the field of software products and continuous delivery. The study done in 2017 focused on four key capabilities for software product releases.
---

# Motivation

!!! abstract "This section is heavily based on the book *Accelerate*."

Compared to other industries, software products have low up front costs and require low distribution efforts. These aspects enable us to create cheap prototypes of products and provide them to users globally with little overhead. 

If these traits are limited our business loses its ability to pivot with market changes and we are at the mercy of our competitors. While it is not always necessary to act, the decision to do so should be driven by business factors, not technological limits.

## Key capabilities by *Accelerate*

The book Accelerate by whatnot etc presents the findings of the largest study done in the field of software products and continuous delivery. The study done in 2017 focused on four key capabilities for software product releases.

### Code deployment

Code deployment measures the frequency of how often we release new versions of our application to the consumer.

### Commit to deploy

Commit to deploy describes the lead time from the last software change to make it into a new release for code deployment.

### Recover from down time

Recover from down time is the process of identifying a show stopping problem in a software application to re-establishing a functioning system. Also includes recovering from external attacks like malevolent system infiltrations or denial of service attacks. 

### Change fail rate

Change fail rate appraises how often the distributed software executable does not match the desired expectations. New code deployments should minimize required unexpected fixes.

## Metrics by *Accelerate*

The study compared these key capabilities of software distribution between high and low performing organizations and found that high performers had:

- **46x** frequent code deployments
- **440x** faster lead time from commit to deploy
- **170x** faster mean time to recover from down time
- **1/5** of fails on changes

Building these paradigms into the core of software development enabled high performers to double the probability of reaching their business goals compared to low performers across industries and departments. Improving our software delivery effectiveness will improve our ability to incorporate customer feedback more effectively.
