docs/book/introduction/README.md, before:

---
title: Introduction
description: OpenCollaboration presents a vertical slice of strategies that have proven useful for a broad spectrum of organizations. This brief literary excursion provides the foundation for building an autonomous, flexible, and collaborative environment at the core of our company.
---

# Introduction

Software companies are required to adapt to rapid technological, economical, and political change in order to viably compete on any market. This fact introduces the paradox of providing a stable and low-latency experience while continuously responding to user feedback and regulatory compliance.

*OpenCollaboration* presents a vertical slice of strategies that have proven useful for a broad spectrum of organizations. This brief literary excursion provides the foundation for building an autonomous, flexible, and collaborative environment at the core of our company.

## Structure

*OpenCollaboration* is structured into three sections dealing with processes on different levels of our organization.

- *The anatomy of a software company* covers how to optimally establish our teams and improve organic collaboration while limiting noise. We discuss established strategies of nurturing a growth mindset for sustainably increasing the complexity of our product, expanding the number of teams within our organization, and progress the professional expertise of our employees. The topics discussed in this section are solutions to problems encountered by technology officers and software architects.
- *The anatomy of managing a team* frames supporting principles of leading a team. (WIP) This section covers day to day encounters of technical and team leads.
- *The anatomy of a code change* analyses good practices for day to day work of engineers to achieve software products with high adaptability and stability. This section presents workflows and automation concepts to increase the frequencies of our software deliveries. These solutions are the foundation of sustainable growth and are applied by engineers across all levels.

While the structure of this book does follow the reciprocal typical career progression of an engineer, we encourage all readers to glance at every section. Certain sociotechnical dependencies become more visible when digesting the entire book.

## What this book is NOT

### This is not an engineering book

A couple decades ago the core business of organization was run through sales, marketing, and HR departments. IT was considered a necessary cost factor that was at best overlooked, at worst the first destination of budget cuts. Today, the situation appears to be reversed.

This book covers a lot of ground and not all of it is confined within an engineering frustum. When reading this book, consider how the practices described within can be used in tandem with departments outside of engineering to inject more efficient communication channels into our iteration process.

This book does not include source code, does not advocate for any particular tech stack, and does not assume the use of any tool or platform (~*~Part III does expect minor experience in version control).

### This is not a step-by-step guide

At best, this book may be used as a reference or as a starting point for evolving our organization. We do not try and change an entire organization overnight.

The goal of our organization is to solve the problems of our customers. We avoid blankly copying processes of successful companies as we might not necessarily understand why those processes are successful within that company.

That being said, we found the concepts written in this book to be helpful for a broad spectrum of software companies and are pretty confident that readers will accumulate some benefit.

### This is not a bible

We avoid the term "best practices" in this book. "Best" is subject to industries, personalities, geographic location, diversity of staff, size of organization, and numerous other factors that using the superlative is pure hubris. The strategies in this book are shared without righteous zeal.

The concepts discussed in this book should be applied by implementing small changes for a limited number of teams. We reduce the cost and risk of verifying the positive effect we intend to implement in our organization by testing the changes within an isolated team.

Lastly, while we do our best to keep the language as inclusive as possible there is a non-zero chance that certain words or phrases will not be received in the way they were meant to be. Language is difficult. The written word is difficult. Please read this book with the positive intent that it was penned in.

Commit message:

🖊️ Indicate progress and consolidate spelling of chapters (#21)
* List progress in introduction

* Consolidate spelling of analyze

* Consolidate lower case spelling of chapters

docs/book/introduction/README.md, after:

---
title: Introduction
description: OpenCollaboration presents a vertical slice of strategies that have proven useful for a broad spectrum of organizations. This brief literary excursion provides the foundation for building an autonomous, flexible, and collaborative environment at the core of our company.
---

# Introduction

Software companies are required to adapt to rapid technological, economical, and political change in order to viably compete on any market. This fact introduces the paradox of providing a stable and low-latency experience while continuously responding to user feedback and regulatory compliance.

*OpenCollaboration* presents a vertical slice of strategies that have proven useful for a broad spectrum of organizations. This brief literary excursion provides the foundation for building an autonomous, flexible, and collaborative environment at the core of our company.

## Structure

*OpenCollaboration* is structured into three sections dealing with processes on different levels of our organization.

- *The anatomy of a software company* covers how to optimally establish our teams and improve organic collaboration while limiting noise. We discuss established strategies of nurturing a growth mindset for sustainably increasing the complexity of our product, expanding the number of teams within our organization, and progress the professional expertise of our employees. The topics discussed in this section are solutions to problems encountered by technology officers and software architects.
- *The anatomy of managing a team* frames supporting principles of leading a team. This section covers day to day encounters of technical and team leads.
- *The anatomy of a code change* analyzes good practices for day to day work of engineers to achieve software products with high adaptability and stability. This section presents workflows and automation concepts to increase the frequencies of our software deliveries. These solutions are the foundation of sustainable growth and are applied by engineers across all levels.

While the structure of this book does follow the reciprocal typical career progression of an engineer, we encourage all readers to glance at every section. Certain sociotechnical dependencies become more visible when digesting the entire book.

## What this book is NOT

### This is not an engineering book

A couple decades ago the core business of organization was run through sales, marketing, and HR departments. IT was considered a necessary cost factor that was at best overlooked, at worst the first destination of budget cuts. Today, the situation appears to be reversed.

This book covers a lot of ground and not all of it is confined within an engineering frustum. When reading this book, consider how the practices described within can be used in tandem with departments outside of engineering to inject more efficient communication channels into our iteration process.

This book does not include source code, does not advocate for any particular tech stack, and does not assume the use of any tool or platform (~*~Part III does expect minor experience in version control).

### This is not a step-by-step guide

At best, this book may be used as a reference or as a starting point for evolving our organization. We do not try and change an entire organization overnight.

The goal of our organization is to solve the problems of our customers. We avoid blankly copying processes of successful companies as we might not necessarily understand why those processes are successful within that company.

That being said, we found the concepts written in this book to be helpful for a broad spectrum of software companies and are pretty confident that readers will accumulate some benefit.

### This is not a bible

We avoid the term "best practices" in this book. "Best" is subject to industries, personalities, geographic location, diversity of staff, size of organization, and numerous other factors that using the superlative is pure hubris. The strategies in this book are shared without righteous zeal.

The concepts discussed in this book should be applied by implementing small changes for a limited number of teams. We reduce the cost and risk of verifying the positive effect we intend to implement in our organization by testing the changes within an isolated team.

Lastly, while we do our best to keep the language as inclusive as possible there is a non-zero chance that certain words or phrases will not be received in the way they were meant to be. Language is difficult. The written word is difficult. Please read this book with the positive intent that it was penned in.

## Current progress

We are hard at work on *The anatomy of a code change* and are releasing new chapters periodically. A breakdown of our progress with a detailed list of chapters is available on the individual section pages.

- [x] Introduction
    - [x] Notes and structure
    - [x] First draft
    - [x] Polish
    - [ ] Edit for v1.0.0
- [x] [The anatomy of a software company](../anatomy-of-a-software-company/README.md)
    - [x] Notes and structure
    - [x] First draft
    - [x] Polish
    - [ ] Edit for v1.0.0
- [ ] [The anatomy of managing a team](../anatomy-of-managing-a-team/README.md)
    - [ ] Notes and structure
    - [ ] First draft
    - [ ] Polish
    - [ ] Edit for v1.0.0
- [ ] [The anatomy of a code change](../anatomy-of-a-code-change/README.md)
    - [x] Notes and structure
    - [ ] First draft
    - [ ] Polish
    - [ ] Edit for v1.0.0
