docs/book/anatomy-of-a-software-company/document-decisions.md, before:

# Documenting decisions

Decision making is always speculative. Even with lots of data to rely on, we are predicting the future.

https://www.redhat.com/architect/architecture-decision-records

Decision Records

Number
Date
People involved
Title
Context
Decision
Status
Consequences

Make a decision and document it. Easier for people to accept a conscious decision if the decision making process is available.
Document the outcome of a decision, to track successful and unsuccessful patterns.

Document, review, and iterate to ensure every participant understands the same thing. Take notes during meetings and share them with everybody to avoid misunderstandings.

Keep all of the above decisions and progress visible and public to all stakeholders. Update continously. Maybe tooling that accumulates PR, issue comments, documentation, kanban boards, design docs etc.

The more context we are able to give, the more transparent our decision is communicated. When evaluating the use of different libraries add the name and version of the libraries, benchmark numbers, ease of implementation, licensing, projected maintenance work etc.

We clearly define the evaluation process that led to our final decision with all aspects. Every decision has advantages and drawbacks which need to be documented and unambiguously weighed against each other.

Parameters change over time and decisions will be reevaluated.

Commit message:

Summarize notes on documenting decisions

docs/book/anatomy-of-a-software-company/document-decisions.md, after:

# Documenting decisions

Making decisions is a speculative process. Even ones deduced from considerable experience and data points are still predicting the future. Recording our decision making process and the outcomes improves the precision of our fortune telling over time as we can identify successful and unsuccessful patterns.

## Decision records

[Red Hat published an article](https://www.redhat.com/architect/architecture-decision-records) about their process of documenting software architecture decisions using *architecture decision records* (ADR). Expanding beyond the demands of software architecture, a general base framework for recording decisions includes the following properties.

- Date and Title
- Context
    - Problem statement
    - Solution options
    - People involved
- Decision
    - Solution
    - Advantages
    - Drawbacks

The more context we are able to give, the more transparent our decision is communicated. We explain the relevant success indicators and evaluate potential options. We include the names and titles of the people involved in the decision as a future contact for context we cannot translate into written form.

Every decision has advantages and disadvantages which are unambiguously weighed against each other. If the decision evaluation process is written down and available, people are more likely to accept a conscious decision and its drawbacks.

The world is not static. With changing environmental parameters or organizational needs we might reevaluate passed decisions moving forward.
