docs/book/anatomy-of-a-software-company/innersourcing.md, before:

# Innersourcing

Innersourcing is the practice of sharing source code, practices, documentation within an organization. Much like open source projects, the motivation is to reduce duplicate work and increase velocity for market mandated features. Through innersourcing practices and communication channels we share tools, libraries, and platforms globally through our organization.

We provide time, space, and money to enable and encourage people from different teams with similar skills and expertise to come together to learn from each other and to develop our professional competencies. Because this form of communication is not strictly tied to the design and building of operational software systems, Conway's law plays a less potent role and freer cross-association between teams can take place.

## Breaking down silos

Innersourcing done appropriately builds further trust between counterparts on other teams and encourage practitioners to communicate between departments. This kind of engagement rewards collaboration and organically encourages professional upskilling. The best thing we can do for our organization and people is institute a culture of experimentation and learning, and invest in the technical and management capabilities that enable it.

High discoverability of projects and code on a broad scale avoids wasted time and work duplication. By introducing the habit of researching existing internal solutions before tackling problems, our organization avoids solving the same problems multiple times. When engineers reach out to each other with questions we reduce silos between teams, disciplines, and departments.

## Changes to inner source code

Changes to inner source code are done using the same processes as we follow within our teams projects. This process is detailed in [Part III - The anatomy of a code change](http://127.0.0.1:8000/book/anatomy-of-a-code-change/). Using the same process across our organization with no additional red tape reduces overhead in communication and ramp up time.

When changes to the source code itself are deemed dramatic, teams have the option to build a downstream/upstream project consuming the inner source code and providing this wrapper once again as an innersource solution to the team and the rest of our organization.

Commit message:

🌍 Add meta data and social cards (#12)
* Ignore cache of mkdocs

* Generate social cards on release

* Add metadata to first section

* Add metadata to introduction section

* Update description and add social cards

* Rename chapters in navigation

docs/book/anatomy-of-a-software-company/innersourcing.md, after:

---
title: Innersourcing
description: Innersourcing is the practice of sharing source code, practices, documentation within an organization. Much like open source projects, the motivation is to reduce duplicate work and increase velocity for market mandated features.
---

# Innersourcing

Innersourcing is the practice of sharing source code, practices, documentation within an organization. Much like open source projects, the motivation is to reduce duplicate work and increase velocity for market mandated features. Through innersourcing practices and communication channels we share tools, libraries, and platforms globally through our organization.

We provide time, space, and money to enable and encourage people from different teams with similar skills and expertise to come together to learn from each other and to develop our professional competencies. Because this form of communication is not strictly tied to the design and building of operational software systems, Conway's law plays a less potent role and freer cross-association between teams can take place.

## Breaking down silos

Innersourcing done appropriately builds further trust between counterparts on other teams and encourage practitioners to communicate between departments. This kind of engagement rewards collaboration and organically encourages professional upskilling. The best thing we can do for our organization and people is institute a culture of experimentation and learning, and invest in the technical and management capabilities that enable it.

High discoverability of projects and code on a broad scale avoids wasted time and work duplication. By introducing the habit of researching existing internal solutions before tackling problems, our organization avoids solving the same problems multiple times. When engineers reach out to each other with questions we reduce silos between teams, disciplines, and departments.

## Changes to inner source code

Changes to inner source code are done using the same processes as we follow within our teams projects. This process is detailed in [Part III - The anatomy of a code change](http://127.0.0.1:8000/book/anatomy-of-a-code-change/). Using the same process across our organization with no additional red tape reduces overhead in communication and ramp up time.

When changes to the source code itself are deemed dramatic, teams have the option to build a downstream/upstream project consuming the inner source code and providing this wrapper once again as an innersource solution to the team and the rest of our organization.
