docs/book/collaborating-within-a-company/README.md, before:

---
title: Collaborating within a Company
description: This part covers tools and strategies at an organizational level to encourage dynamic and autonomous teams. Flexible teams will enable our organization to adapt to market changes more rapidly.
---

# Collaborating within a Company

<!-- Why do we need autonomy? -->

Technology officers and software architects make decisions about long-term success, sustainability, and growth for our organization and products. The ability to decide and execute lasting visions comes at the cost of immediacy but immediate decisions and iterations strengthen our market competitiveness to reach our long-term goals. Hence, we delegate immediacy and build an environment that empowers our teams to act autonomously.

<!-- How do we sustain autonomy? Tease the contents of the section -->

Implementing autonomy requires a guiding hand. This chapter focuses on strategies to ensure we foster collaboration and reduce distractions, we manage the information to noise ratio in communication and ensure our teams have all the tools to make decisions without propagating them up the hierarchy. We lay the foundation of our software with our organization's topology and culture.

## Inverse Conway Maneuver

<!-- TODO: (Daniel) move to team interactions -->

!!! quote
    *"Any organization that designs a system (defined broadly) will produce a design whose structure is a copy of the organization's communication structure."*  
    - Melvin E. Conway

    *"If you have four groups working on a compiler, you'll get a 4-pass compiler."*  
    - Eric S. Raymond

    *"The architecture of the system gets cemented in the forms of the teams that develop it."*  
    - Ruth Malan

    *"Someone who claims to be an [Software] architect needs both technical and social skills. They also need a remit that is broader than pure technology - they need to have a say in business strategies, organizational structures, and personnel issues."*  
    - Allan Kelly

<!-- What is Conway's Law? -->

The above quotes refer to Conway's Law. It observes the universal behavior that our software architecture ultimately copies our organization's team layout. Before a single line of code is written, we may deduce shape of our product by observing our teams' topology.

<!-- What is the Inverse Conway Maneuver? -->

Utilizing Conway's Law as a tool, the *Inverse Conway Maneuver* states that we design our organization around our desired software architecture and continuous delivery flow, not the other way around. Moving people and teams in a way to design communication channels more efficiently will ultimately and organically lead to less friction in software delivery.

## Growth mindset

<!-- TODO: (Daniel) move to devops -->

<!-- Why do we need a growth mindset? -->

We appreciate that our development cycles offer a continuous learning process for our product and us personally. When we embrace change with objective acceptance we accelerate our ability to adapt and improve our work across our organization. An environment that celebrates innovation, breeds innovation; our teams quit merely reacting to change, they drive it. At which point we become vigilant not to seek change for change's sake.

Similarly, we do not accept *because we have always done it this way* as an argument. Exploring solutions and new avenues of collaboration potentially solves problems more effectively and at a lower cost. Sustained collective learning and development spreads knowledge horizontally, reducing the negative repercussions when team members take time off or leave entirely. Professional growth combined with transparent career progression increases employee satisfaction and retention, lowering the risk of adverse turnover rates.

<!-- Give an overview of the chapters -->

The chapters in *Part I - Collaborating within a Company* cover topics to build autonomous teams and planning collaboration strategies between these teams. We analyze the use cases of different communication channels and cover strategies for upskilling our teams.

Commit message:

🖊️ Edit chapter Team Interactions (#81)
* Rearrange parts across chapters

* Add TODO

* Rearrange content and edit conway's law

* Edit interaction forms

* Update rewrite progress

* Edit team interactions

* Add todo

* Edit communication via interaction forms

* Edit communication paragraph

* Update graphics

* Edit the chapter for readability

* Edit the last paragraphs

* Fix vale errors and grammar issues

* Edit for readability

* Fix vale warnings

docs/book/collaborating-within-a-company/README.md, after:

---
title: Collaborating within a Company
description: This part covers tools and strategies at an organizational level to encourage dynamic and autonomous teams. Flexible teams will enable our organization to adapt to market changes more rapidly.
---

# Collaborating within a Company

<!-- Why do we need autonomy? -->

Technology officers and software architects make decisions about long-term success, sustainability, and growth for our organization and products. The ability to decide and execute lasting visions comes at the cost of immediacy but immediate decisions and iterations strengthen our market competitiveness to reach our long-term goals. Hence, we delegate immediacy and build an environment that empowers our teams to act autonomously.

<!-- How do we sustain autonomy? Tease the contents of the section -->

Implementing autonomy requires a guiding hand. This chapter focuses on strategies to ensure we foster collaboration and reduce distractions, we manage the information to noise ratio in communication and ensure our teams have all the tools to make decisions without propagating them up the hierarchy. We lay the foundation of our software with our organization's topology and culture.

!!! note "Rewrite progress"

    The book includes a rough draft of the chapters I want to cover. However, these mostly consist of notes and currently do not offer a coherent reading experience. I am in the process of rewriting and editing the book for an initial release version. The following chapters are in a somewhat decent shape:

    - [x] Autonomous Team Structure
    - [x] Team Interactions
    - [ ] Communication Channels
    - [x] Working in Cycles
    - [ ] Innersourcing
    - [ ] Education and Training

## Growth mindset

<!-- TODO: (Daniel) move to devops -->

<!-- Why do we need a growth mindset? -->

We appreciate that our development cycles offer a continuous learning process for our product and us personally. When we embrace change with objective acceptance we accelerate our ability to adapt and improve our work across our organization. An environment that celebrates innovation, breeds innovation; our teams quit merely reacting to change, they drive it. At which point we become vigilant not to seek change for change's sake.

Similarly, we do not accept *because we have always done it this way* as an argument. Exploring solutions and new avenues of collaboration potentially solves problems more effectively and at a lower cost. Sustained collective learning and development spreads knowledge horizontally, reducing the negative repercussions when team members take time off or leave entirely. Professional growth combined with transparent career progression increases employee satisfaction and retention, lowering the risk of adverse turnover rates.

<!-- Give an overview of the chapters -->

The chapters in *Part I - Collaborating within a Company* cover topics to build autonomous teams and planning collaboration strategies between these teams. We analyze the use cases of different communication channels and cover strategies for upskilling our teams.
