docs/resources.md, before:

# Resources

## Literature

**Software Engineering at Google: Lessons Learned from Programming Over Time**  
Titus Winters, Tom Manshreck, Hyrum Wright  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 28.02.2020  

**Building Microservices: Designing Fine-Grained Systems**  
Sam Newman  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 02.02.2015  

**Accelerate: The Science of Lean Software and DevOps: Building and Scaling High Performing Technology Organizations**  
Nicole Forsgren PhD, Jez Humble, Gene Kim  
IT Revolution, 27.03.2018  

**Kubernetes Best Practices: Blueprints for Building Successful Applications on Kubernetes**  
Brendan Burns, Eddie Villalba, Dave Strebel, Lachlan Evenson  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 14.11.2019  

**Effective DevOps: Building a Culture of Collaboration, Affinity, and Tooling at Scale**  
Jennifer Davis and Ryn Daniels  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 19.07.2016  

**Team Topologies: Organizing Business and Technology Teams for Fast Flow**  
Manuel Pais and Matthew Skelton  
IT Revolution, 17.09.2019  

**Thinking in Promises**  
Mark Burgess  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 09.06.2015  

**Why the Internet only just works**  
Mark Handley  
BT Technology Journal, Vol 24 No 3, July 2006  

## Youtube

[**Cloud Native Computing Foundation**](https://www.youtube.com/@cncf)  
[**GOTO Conferences**](https://www.youtube.com/@GOTO-)  
[**InfoQ**](https://www.youtube.com/@infoq)  
[**Academy Software Foundation**](https://www.youtube.com/@AcademySoftwareFoundation)

Commit message:

🪶 Add chapter about code reviews (#36)
* Add notes to code review

* Organize notes for code review

* Mark chapter as completed

* Organize notes for code review chapter

* Add paper to resources

* Edit notes on reviewing code

* Edits across chapter

* Minor fixes

* Restructure chapter

* Write intro for code review

* Add image of types of code reviews

* Edit code review benefits

* Edit the types of code review

* Expand minor sentences

* Complete strategy section

* Add code review chapter to dist

* Fix vale errors

* Proofread chapter

* Add metadata

docs/resources.md, after:

# Resources

## Literature

**Software Engineering at Google: Lessons Learned from Programming Over Time**  
Titus Winters, Tom Manshreck, Hyrum Wright  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 28.02.2020  

**Building Microservices: Designing Fine-Grained Systems**  
Sam Newman  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 02.02.2015  

**Accelerate: The Science of Lean Software and DevOps: Building and Scaling High Performing Technology Organizations**  
Nicole Forsgren PhD, Jez Humble, Gene Kim  
IT Revolution, 27.03.2018  

**Kubernetes Best Practices: Blueprints for Building Successful Applications on Kubernetes**  
Brendan Burns, Eddie Villalba, Dave Strebel, Lachlan Evenson  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 14.11.2019  

**Effective DevOps: Building a Culture of Collaboration, Affinity, and Tooling at Scale**  
Jennifer Davis and Ryn Daniels  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 19.07.2016  

**Team Topologies: Organizing Business and Technology Teams for Fast Flow**  
Manuel Pais and Matthew Skelton  
IT Revolution, 17.09.2019  

**Thinking in Promises**  
Mark Burgess  
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 09.06.2015  

**Why the Internet only just works**  
Mark Handley  
BT Technology Journal, Vol 24 No 3, July 2006  

**The Costs and Benefits of Pair Programming**  
Alistair Cockburn and Laurie Williams  
February 2000  

## Youtube

[**Cloud Native Computing Foundation**](https://www.youtube.com/@cncf)  
[**GOTO Conferences**](https://www.youtube.com/@GOTO-)  
[**InfoQ**](https://www.youtube.com/@infoq)  
[**Academy Software Foundation**](https://www.youtube.com/@AcademySoftwareFoundation)
